README.md, before:

# Code standards and templates

![In Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/Status-In%20Development-yellow)

This repository outlines best practices for writing reproducible code and structuring project directories.

Templates include:
- [r_module.R](https://github.com/bgcasey/code_standards/blob/main/templates/r_module.R): A template for writing individual R modules.
- [r_function.R](https://github.com/bgcasey/code_standards/blob/main/templates/r_function.R): A template for writing well-documented and formatted R functions.
- [javascript_module.js](https://github.com/bgcasey/code_standards/blob/main/templates/javascript_module.js): A template for writing individual JavaScript modules.
- [javascript_function.js](https://github.com/bgcasey/code_standards/blob/main/templates/javascript_function.js): A template for writing well-documented and formatted JavaScript functions.
- [python_module.js](https://github.com/bgcasey/code_standards/blob/main/templates/python_module.py): A template for writing individual Python modules.
- [python_function.js](https://github.com/bgcasey/code_standards/blob/main/templates/python_function.py): A template for writing well-documented and formatted Python functions.
- [r_project_template](https://github.com/bgcasey/r_project_template): An R project template that provides a structured directory for organizing data, scripts, outputs, and documentation.  

The goal of this repository is to provide standards that improve collaboration, streamline code reviews, and make it easier to revisit past work.

**Why use these standards?**
1. **Sharing work with colleagues**:
    - Standardized templates and code conventions ensure that collaborators can easily understand, run, and build upon your work.
2. **In-house review of your work**:
    - A well-organized, reproducible codebase makes internal reviews easier. Team members or supervisors can quickly grasp your methods and results by examining the code, making it easier to identify and troubleshoot any issues.
3. **Sharing work with your future self**:
    - Revisiting old projects is easier when everything is well-documented and logically structured. This reduces the learning curve when returning to a project after time away.

While the examples provided are focused on R, the basic principles apply to any coding language. Clear documentation, structured file organization, and consistent coding styles enhances reproducibility and collaboration across different programming environments.

---

## Table of Contents
- [1. Code Style](#1-code-style)
- [2. Documenting Code](#2-documenting-code)
- [3. Documenting Functions](#3-documenting-functions)
- [4. Project Directory Structure](#4-project-directory-structure)
- [5. ABMI GitHub Policy](#5-abmi-github-policy)
---
## 1. Code Style

Style R code according to the conventions outlined in the [tidyverse style guide](https://style.tidyverse.org/index.html).  Google's [R style guide](https://google.github.io/styleguide/Rguide.html) is based in this. While you are encouraged to familiarize yourself with the tidyverse guide, here are some highlights:

### Filenames

Give your files meaningful names and avoid special characters. Use a consistent naming convention:

- **snake_case**:
    - Words are separated by underscores (`_`).
    - Letters are lowercase.
    - Example: `1_your_code_name.R`.
- **kebab-case**:
    - Words are separated by hyphens (`-`).
    - Letters are lowercase.
    - Example: `1-your-code-name.R`.
- **camelCase**:
    - The first word is lowercase, and subsequent words start with a capital letter.
    - No spaces or special characters between words.
    - Example: `1YourCodeName.R`.

Prefix files with numbers to show the order that files should be run:

```
00_process_response_data.R
01_process_predictor_data.R
...
09_generalized_linear_mixed_models.R
10_visualize_results.R
```

### Object names

Object names within the code should be concise, descriptive, and follow a consistent naming convention:

```R
bird_data <- read.csv("bird_species_data.csv")
pred_var <- read.csv("predictor_variables.csv")
```



### Code Syntax

- Add spaces after commas
- Place a space after `()` in functions. 
- `{{ }}` should have inner spaces
- Surround operators (`==`, `+`, `-`, `<-`, etc.) with spaces.
- For curly brackets `{}`, end lines with `{` and start lines with `}`
- Use `<-` to assign object names.
- Limit the line width of your code to 80 characters for readability. This will ensure that the code can be printed or displayed without cropping. 
- Comment your code to explain its purpose, inputs, outputs, and rationale. Comments should begin with # followed by a space.
- 
### Auto-styling

R code can be automatically formatted according to the [tidyverse style guide](https://style.tidyverse.org/index.html) using the `styler` R package:

```r
library(styler)
styler::style_file("file/path/file.R", style = tidyverse_style)
```

See the `styler` [documentation](https://styler.r-lib.org/) for instructions on how to integrate `styler` into the RStudio GUI. 

---
## 2. Documenting Code

Proper documentation is crucial for ensuring code reproducibility. It allows colleagues and reviewers to fully understand your rationale, methods, and outputs. While there are many ways to document code, here are some recomendations:

### Code header
Scripts should start with a header that includes the following components:

| **Component** | **Description**                                                                                                    |
| ------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| **Title**     | A brief and descriptive name for the script that summarizes its purpose.                                           |
| **Author**    | The name of the person or team responsible for writing the code.                                                   |
| **Date**      | The creation or last modification date of the code, formatted as YYYY-MM-DD for consistency.                       |
| **Inputs**    | A list of the input data, files, or parameters required for the script to run, including file paths or formats.    |
| **Outputs**   | A description of the output produced by the script, including file names, formats, and what the results represent. |
| **Notes**     | A concise explanation of what the code does, its purpose, and any important details about its function.            |


**Example header in YAML-like format:**

```R
# ---
# title: "Title"
# author: "Your Name"
# created: "YYYY-MM-DD"
# inputs: [list the required input files]
# outputs: [list the output files produced by the script]
# notes: 
#   "This script performs [describe the main purpose of the script].
#   The script uses [briefly describe data or object inputs] to 
#   [briefly describe the main steps or processes]. The script
#   produces [describe the final output]."
# ---

```

## Code body

The body of your script should be divided into clear, well-labeled, numbered sections for easy navigation:

### Setup

Start with a setup section. This section will usually include the following subsections:

- **Load packages**: List all the required R packages, each accompanied by a comment explaining their use and package version.

```R
## 1.1 Load packages ----
library(tidyverse)   # data manipulation and visualization (version: 1.3.1)
library(lubridate)   # date-time manipulation (version: 1.7.10)
```

- **Import data**: Describe the data and objects that are being loaded.

```R
## 1.2 Import data ----
# Description of data
# data <- read.csv("path/to/your/data.csv")
```

### Section headings

Each subsequent section of the script should include a descriptibve numbered heading. Beneath the heading, include a comment describing the section's purpose. This makes it easier for others to understand the logical flow of the script. For example:

```R
# 2. Data Cleaning ---- 
# This section handles the preprocessing and cleaning of the input 
# data. It removes missing values, filters unnecessary rows, and 
# transforms variables.
```

Subdivide sections as needed with descriptive numbered subheadings:

```R
## 2.1 Filter data ----
# This step filters the data to keep only relevant observations.
filtered_data <- data %>% filter(variable == "value")
```

---

## 3. Documenting Functions

Functions should be well-documented to ensure they are understandable and easy to use. See [Roxygen2](https://roxygen2.r-lib.org/) for more information on function style conventions.

### Function Header

Each function should have a header that describes the function's purpose, its inputs (parameters), and the expected output:

| **Component**   | **Description**                                                                                                                                                              |
| --------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Title**       | A brief, descriptive title of the function that summarizes its purpose.                                                                                                      |
| **Description** | A short explanation of what the function does, including the primary task or transformation it performs.                                                                     |
| **@param**      | A description of each parameter (argument) the function accepts. It should include the parameter name, its type, and what it represents or does.                             |
| **@return**     | A description of what the function returns, specifying the type of the returned object and what information or result it holds.                                              |
| **@example**    | A reproducible example showing how to use the function, including input data, the function call, and expected output. This helps users understand how to apply the function. |

### Function body

The function body contains the code that implements the function. Each major step in the code should include a numbered comment explaining its purpose. This helps users understand the function and makes debugging easier.

**Recommended structure for a function:**

```R
#' [Title of the Function]
#'
#' [Brief description of what the function does]
#'
#' @param [param_name] [Type and description of the parameter]
#' @param [param_name] [Type and description of the parameter]
#' @param [param_name] [Type and description of the parameter]
#' @return [Description of the return value or object]
#' 
#' @example # Example usage of the function
#' [Example data]
#' [Example function call]
#' [Example result printing]
[function_name] <- function([param1], [param2], 
                            [param3] = [default_value], 
                            [param4]) {
  # [Step 1: Description of what this step does]
  [code for step 1]
  
  # [Step 2: Description of what this step does]
  [code for step 2]
  
  # [Step 3: Description of what this step does]
  [code for step 3]
  
  # [Step 4: Description of what this step does]
  [code for step 4]
  
  # [Step 5: Description of what this step does]
  [code for step 5]
  
  return([result])
}
```

---
## 4. Project Directory Structure

Data, code, and output files should be organized within a well-structured directory. For example:

| **Item**                 | **Description**                   |
| ------------------------ | --------------------------------- |
| **0_data/**              | Raw and manipulated data  [^1]    |
| ├── external/            | Raw data from external sources    |
| ├── processed/           | Data that has been manipulated    |
| **1_code/**              | Code and scripts for analysis     |
| ├── GEE/                 | Google Earth Engine scripts       |
| │   └── gee_git_clone.sh | Script to clone GEE repository    |
| ├── r_scripts/           | R scripts for data processing     |
| │   └── r_module.R       | Template R script                 |
| │   └── r_function.R     | Template R function               |
| **2_pipeline/**          | Data processing pipeline          |
| **3_output/**            | Results of analysis               |
| ├── data/                | Processed datasets                |
| ├── figures/             | Generated figures                 |
| ├── maps/                | Generated maps                    |
| ├── models/              | Model outputs                     |
| └── tables/              | Tables from analysis              |
| **4_writing/**           | Manuscript and reports            |
| ├── manuscript/          | Drafts of the manuscript          |
| └── reports/             | Reports and additional documents  |
| **5_presentations/**     | Presentation materials            |
| ├── slides/              | Presentation slides (e.g., .pptx) |
| └── posters/             | Conference posters                |
| **README.md**            | Project overview and instructions |

A template repository can be found [here](https://github.com/bgcasey/r_project_template). It can be used to generate new GitHub repositories with the above directory structure. While the template is designed for R projects, projects in other programming environments should maintain a similar directory structure. 

* For most projects, data will not be pushed to Github (i.e., added to GitIgnore).
---

## 5. ABMI GitHub Policy

GitHub (and Git) are powerful tools for facilitating reproducible code repositories. This will allow the ABMI to better showcase the technical work that goes into developing the variety of data products we provide. The purpose of the ABMI GitHub Policy is to provide general information to new users and outline a standard policy for what information is made available. The following document outlines:

1. Member privileges to the organizational GitHub account.  
2. Repository naming conventions.  
3. Repository Visibility  
4. Topic tags

### Member privileges

The Director(s) of the Science Centre are **Owners** of the organizational Github account ([https://github.com/ABbiodiversity](https://github.com/ABbiodiversity)). In addition, the Director(s) can declare a subset of users as **Owners** to manage day to day operations of the account. 

All ABMI staff who use GitHub are able to become a **Member** of the ABMI organizational account ([https://github.com/ABbiodiversity](https://github.com/ABbiodiversity)).  Members are strongly encouraged to make their membership status of the organization public. In addition, anyone outside of ABMI staff that is supporting ABMI work can be added as an **Outside Collaborator** upon approval of the *Current Owners* (Schedule 1).

### Repository Visibility

All repositories that are used as part of work for the ABMI should always be **Private.** This allows for users to develop the repository and all content within it before an official release. The repository should then be made **Public** if it meets to following conditions:

1) Does not contain any sensitive information (e.g., site location, proprietary data products).  
2) Coincides with or after the release of the associated data product.

Repositories can be maintained as **Private** if they relate to code that is used for internal processes (e.g., data cleaning).

Users are free to initially make these **Private** repositories under their personal GitHub accounts. However, all repositories should be transferred to the ABMI organizational account under the following circumstances:

1) Public release of the data product.  
2) Private release of a completed data product used for internal purposes.  
3) Employee no longer works for the ABMI.

Repositories should be **Archived** as read-only (but can remain public) if active development has ceased and is unlikely to occur again in the future. 

We encourage all GitHub users to make their repositories **Public** whenever possible as it showcases both their work, and the work of the ABMI to stakeholders.

#### Releases

Whenever work on a repository has been completed, a **Release** tag should be added. These releases should be versioned using a three digit format that corresponds to major (changes that break functionality), minor (backwards compatible changes), and patches (bug fixes, typos; e.g., v1.0.2).

### Repository naming conventions

In general, repositories should be named using the **Camel Case** format (e.g., StreamConnectivity, BirdModels, etc..). The format within each repository is flexible, but we recommend trying to implement a standardized folder structure when possible. 

Example of the [folder structure](#4-project-directory-structure) being adopted by the Science Centre.

### Topics 
Topics are a way for users to add “tags” to their repositories. This allows similar repositories to be grouped together to assist accessibility through search. These tags are under development, but we recommend users implement some of the following tags when possible:

- *documentation* \- used to identify if the repository is used as technical documentation of an analysis or workflow.  
- *internal-tool* \- used to identify any repository that is used only for internal workflows.  
- *species-distribution-models* \- used to identify repositories associated with the ABMI species models.  
- *project* \- to differentiate between one off projects and those that will be continually updated.  
- *r-package* \- used to indicate the repository contains an R package with associated functions. 

### Github Pages
GitHub Pages are a great resource for creating static HTML pages that can be shared ([https://abbiodiversity.github.io/AmphibianModels/](https://abbiodiversity.github.io/AmphibianModels/)). The *Bookdown* format is great for creating technical documents and is fairly easy to create and maintain. Each centre within the ABMI has methods for developing technical documentation, so this is not a requirement for GitHub users.

### Questions
If you have any questions about your repositories, please contact [Brandon Allen](mailto:brandon.allen@ualberta.ca) or [Marcus Becker](mailto:mabecker@ualberta.ca).

---

[^1]: Data files are generally added to `.gitignore` to prevent them from being pushed to GitHub.

Commit message:

Edited notes and section header instructions

README.md, after:

# Code standards and templates

![In Development](https://img.shields.io/badge/Status-In%20Development-yellow)

This repository outlines best practices for writing reproducible code and structuring project directories.

Templates include:
- [r_module.R](https://github.com/bgcasey/code_standards/blob/main/templates/r_module.R): A template for writing individual R modules.
- [r_function.R](https://github.com/bgcasey/code_standards/blob/main/templates/r_function.R): A template for writing well-documented and formatted R functions.
- [javascript_module.js](https://github.com/bgcasey/code_standards/blob/main/templates/javascript_module.js): A template for writing individual JavaScript modules.
- [javascript_function.js](https://github.com/bgcasey/code_standards/blob/main/templates/javascript_function.js): A template for writing well-documented and formatted JavaScript functions.
- [python_module.js](https://github.com/bgcasey/code_standards/blob/main/templates/python_module.py): A template for writing individual Python modules.
- [python_function.js](https://github.com/bgcasey/code_standards/blob/main/templates/python_function.py): A template for writing well-documented and formatted Python functions.
- [r_project_template](https://github.com/bgcasey/r_project_template): An R project template that provides a structured directory for organizing data, scripts, outputs, and documentation.  

The goal of this repository is to provide standards that improve collaboration, streamline code reviews, and make it easier to revisit past work.

**Why use these standards?**
1. **Sharing work with colleagues**:
    - Standardized templates and code conventions ensure that collaborators can easily understand, run, and build upon your work.
2. **In-house review of your work**:
    - A well-organized, reproducible codebase makes internal reviews easier. Team members or supervisors can quickly grasp your methods and results by examining the code, making it easier to identify and troubleshoot any issues.
3. **Sharing work with your future self**:
    - Revisiting old projects is easier when everything is well-documented and logically structured. This reduces the learning curve when returning to a project after time away.

While the examples provided are focused on R, the basic principles apply to any coding language. Clear documentation, structured file organization, and consistent coding styles enhances reproducibility and collaboration across different programming environments.

---

## Table of Contents
- [1. Code Style](#1-code-style)
- [2. Documenting Code](#2-documenting-code)
- [3. Documenting Functions](#3-documenting-functions)
- [4. Project Directory Structure](#4-project-directory-structure)
- [5. ABMI GitHub Policy](#5-abmi-github-policy)
---
## 1. Code Style

Style R code according to the conventions outlined in the [tidyverse style guide](https://style.tidyverse.org/index.html).  Google's [R style guide](https://google.github.io/styleguide/Rguide.html) is based in this. While you are encouraged to familiarize yourself with the tidyverse guide, here are some highlights:

### Filenames

Give your files meaningful names and avoid special characters. Use a consistent naming convention:

- **snake_case**:
    - Words are separated by underscores (`_`).
    - Letters are lowercase.
    - Example: `1_your_code_name.R`.
- **kebab-case**:
    - Words are separated by hyphens (`-`).
    - Letters are lowercase.
    - Example: `1-your-code-name.R`.
- **camelCase**:
    - The first word is lowercase, and subsequent words start with a capital letter.
    - No spaces or special characters between words.
    - Example: `1YourCodeName.R`.

Prefix files with numbers to show the order that files should be run:

```
00_process_response_data.R
01_process_predictor_data.R
...
09_generalized_linear_mixed_models.R
10_visualize_results.R
```

### Object names

Object names within the code should be concise, descriptive, and follow a consistent naming convention:

```R
bird_data <- read.csv("bird_species_data.csv")
pred_var <- read.csv("predictor_variables.csv")
```



### Code Syntax

- Add spaces after commas
- Place a space after `()` in functions. 
- `{{ }}` should have inner spaces
- Surround operators (`==`, `+`, `-`, `<-`, etc.) with spaces.
- For curly brackets `{}`, end lines with `{` and start lines with `}`
- Use `<-` to assign object names.
- Limit the line width of your code to 80 characters for readability. This will ensure that the code can be printed or displayed without cropping. 
- Comment your code to explain its purpose, inputs, outputs, and rationale. Comments should begin with # followed by a space.
- 
### Auto-styling

R code can be automatically formatted according to the [tidyverse style guide](https://style.tidyverse.org/index.html) using the `styler` R package:

```r
library(styler)
styler::style_file("file/path/file.R", style = tidyverse_style)
```

See the `styler` [documentation](https://styler.r-lib.org/) for instructions on how to integrate `styler` into the RStudio GUI. 

---
## 2. Documenting Code

Proper documentation is crucial for ensuring code reproducibility. It allows colleagues and reviewers to fully understand your rationale, methods, and outputs. While there are many ways to document code, here are some recomendations:

### Code header
Scripts should start with a header that includes the following components:

| **Component** | **Description**                                                                                                    |
| ------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| **Title**     | A brief and descriptive name for the script that summarizes its purpose.                                           |
| **Author**    | The name of the person or team responsible for writing the code.                                                   |
| **Date**      | The creation or last modification date of the code, formatted as YYYY-MM-DD for consistency.                       |
| **Inputs**    | A list of the input data, files, or parameters required for the script to run, including file paths or formats.    |
| **Outputs**   | A description of the output produced by the script, including file names, formats, and what the results represent. |
| **Notes**     | A concise explanation of what the code does, its purpose, and any important details about its function. You can also use this section to list proposed improvements for the code for future iterations.            |


**Example header in YAML-like format:**

```R
# ---
# title: "Title"
# author: "Your Name"
# created: "YYYY-MM-DD"
# inputs: [list the required input files]
# outputs: [list the output files produced by the script]
# notes: 
#   "This script performs [describe the main purpose of the script].
#   The script uses [briefly describe data or object inputs] to 
#   [briefly describe the main steps or processes]. The script
#   produces [describe the final output]."
# ---

```

## Code body

The body of your script should be divided into clear, well-labeled, numbered sections for easy navigation:

### Setup

Start with a setup section. This section will usually include the following subsections:

- **Load packages**: List all the required R packages, each accompanied by a comment explaining their use and package version.

```R
## 1.1 Load packages ----
library(tidyverse)   # data manipulation and visualization (version: 1.3.1)
library(lubridate)   # date-time manipulation (version: 1.7.10)
```

- **Import data**: Describe the data and objects that are being loaded.

```R
## 1.2 Import data ----
# Description of data
# data <- read.csv("path/to/your/data.csv")
```

### Section headings

Each subsequent section of the script should include a descriptibve numbered heading. Beneath the heading, include a comment describing the section's purpose. This makes it easier for others to understand the logical flow of the script. For example:

```R
# 2. Data Cleaning ---- 
# This section handles the preprocessing and cleaning of the input 
# data. It removes missing values, filters unnecessary rows, and 
# transforms variables.
```

Subdivide sections as needed with descriptive numbered subheadings:

```R
## 2.1 Filter data ----
# This step filters the data to keep only relevant observations.
filtered_data <- data %>% filter(variable == "value")
```
Use four trailing dashes (-), equal signs (=), or hashtags (#) at the end of your headings to 
create discrete sections that are foldable and navigable within RStudio's  **Jump To** menu at the bottom of the editor.



---

## 3. Documenting Functions

Functions should be well-documented to ensure they are understandable and easy to use. See [Roxygen2](https://roxygen2.r-lib.org/) for more information on function style conventions.

### Function Header

Each function should have a header that describes the function's purpose, its inputs (parameters), and the expected output:

| **Component**   | **Description**                                                                                                                                                              |
| --------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Title**       | A brief, descriptive title of the function that summarizes its purpose.                                                                                                      |
| **Description** | A short explanation of what the function does, including the primary task or transformation it performs.                                                                     |
| **@param**      | A description of each parameter (argument) the function accepts. It should include the parameter name, its type, and what it represents or does.                             |
| **@return**     | A description of what the function returns, specifying the type of the returned object and what information or result it holds.                                              |
| **@example**    | A reproducible example showing how to use the function, including input data, the function call, and expected output. This helps users understand how to apply the function. |

### Function body

The function body contains the code that implements the function. Each major step in the code should include a numbered comment explaining its purpose. This helps users understand the function and makes debugging easier.

**Recommended structure for a function:**

```R
#' [Title of the Function]
#'
#' [Brief description of what the function does]
#'
#' @param [param_name] [Type and description of the parameter]
#' @param [param_name] [Type and description of the parameter]
#' @param [param_name] [Type and description of the parameter]
#' @return [Description of the return value or object]
#' 
#' @example # Example usage of the function
#' [Example data]
#' [Example function call]
#' [Example result printing]
[function_name] <- function([param1], [param2], 
                            [param3] = [default_value], 
                            [param4]) {
  # [Step 1: Description of what this step does]
  [code for step 1]
  
  # [Step 2: Description of what this step does]
  [code for step 2]
  
  # [Step 3: Description of what this step does]
  [code for step 3]
  
  # [Step 4: Description of what this step does]
  [code for step 4]
  
  # [Step 5: Description of what this step does]
  [code for step 5]
  
  return([result])
}
```

---
## 4. Project Directory Structure

Data, code, and output files should be organized within a well-structured directory. For example:

| **Item**                 | **Description**                   |
| ------------------------ | --------------------------------- |
| **0_data/**              | Raw and manipulated data  [^1]    |
| ├── external/            | Raw data from external sources    |
| ├── processed/           | Data that has been manipulated    |
| **1_code/**              | Code and scripts for analysis     |
| ├── GEE/                 | Google Earth Engine scripts       |
| │   └── gee_git_clone.sh | Script to clone GEE repository    |
| ├── r_scripts/           | R scripts for data processing     |
| │   └── r_module.R       | Template R script                 |
| │   └── r_function.R     | Template R function               |
| **2_pipeline/**          | Data processing pipeline          |
| **3_output/**            | Results of analysis               |
| ├── data/                | Processed datasets                |
| ├── figures/             | Generated figures                 |
| ├── maps/                | Generated maps                    |
| ├── models/              | Model outputs                     |
| └── tables/              | Tables from analysis              |
| **4_writing/**           | Manuscript and reports            |
| ├── manuscript/          | Drafts of the manuscript          |
| └── reports/             | Reports and additional documents  |
| **5_presentations/**     | Presentation materials            |
| ├── slides/              | Presentation slides (e.g., .pptx) |
| └── posters/             | Conference posters                |
| **README.md**            | Project overview and instructions |

A template repository can be found [here](https://github.com/bgcasey/r_project_template). It can be used to generate new GitHub repositories with the above directory structure. While the template is designed for R projects, projects in other programming environments should maintain a similar directory structure. 

* For most projects, data will not be pushed to Github (i.e., added to GitIgnore).
---

## 5. ABMI GitHub Policy

GitHub (and Git) are powerful tools for facilitating reproducible code repositories. This will allow the ABMI to better showcase the technical work that goes into developing the variety of data products we provide. The purpose of the ABMI GitHub Policy is to provide general information to new users and outline a standard policy for what information is made available. The following document outlines:

1. Member privileges to the organizational GitHub account.  
2. Repository naming conventions.  
3. Repository Visibility  
4. Topic tags

### Member privileges

The Director(s) of the Science Centre are **Owners** of the organizational Github account ([https://github.com/ABbiodiversity](https://github.com/ABbiodiversity)). In addition, the Director(s) can declare a subset of users as **Owners** to manage day to day operations of the account. 

All ABMI staff who use GitHub are able to become a **Member** of the ABMI organizational account ([https://github.com/ABbiodiversity](https://github.com/ABbiodiversity)).  Members are strongly encouraged to make their membership status of the organization public. In addition, anyone outside of ABMI staff that is supporting ABMI work can be added as an **Outside Collaborator** upon approval of the *Current Owners* (Schedule 1).

### Repository Visibility

All repositories that are used as part of work for the ABMI should always be **Private.** This allows for users to develop the repository and all content within it before an official release. The repository should then be made **Public** if it meets to following conditions:

1) Does not contain any sensitive information (e.g., site location, proprietary data products).  
2) Coincides with or after the release of the associated data product.

Repositories can be maintained as **Private** if they relate to code that is used for internal processes (e.g., data cleaning).

Users are free to initially make these **Private** repositories under their personal GitHub accounts. However, all repositories should be transferred to the ABMI organizational account under the following circumstances:

1) Public release of the data product.  
2) Private release of a completed data product used for internal purposes.  
3) Employee no longer works for the ABMI.

Repositories should be **Archived** as read-only (but can remain public) if active development has ceased and is unlikely to occur again in the future. 

We encourage all GitHub users to make their repositories **Public** whenever possible as it showcases both their work, and the work of the ABMI to stakeholders.

#### Releases

Whenever work on a repository has been completed, a **Release** tag should be added. These releases should be versioned using a three digit format that corresponds to major (changes that break functionality), minor (backwards compatible changes), and patches (bug fixes, typos; e.g., v1.0.2).

### Repository naming conventions

In general, repositories should be named using the **Camel Case** format (e.g., StreamConnectivity, BirdModels, etc..). The format within each repository is flexible, but we recommend trying to implement a standardized folder structure when possible. 

Example of the [folder structure](#4-project-directory-structure) being adopted by the Science Centre.

### Topics 
Topics are a way for users to add “tags” to their repositories. This allows similar repositories to be grouped together to assist accessibility through search. These tags are under development, but we recommend users implement some of the following tags when possible:

- *documentation* \- used to identify if the repository is used as technical documentation of an analysis or workflow.  
- *internal-tool* \- used to identify any repository that is used only for internal workflows.  
- *species-distribution-models* \- used to identify repositories associated with the ABMI species models.  
- *project* \- to differentiate between one off projects and those that will be continually updated.  
- *r-package* \- used to indicate the repository contains an R package with associated functions. 

### Github Pages
GitHub Pages are a great resource for creating static HTML pages that can be shared ([https://abbiodiversity.github.io/AmphibianModels/](https://abbiodiversity.github.io/AmphibianModels/)). The *Bookdown* format is great for creating technical documents and is fairly easy to create and maintain. Each centre within the ABMI has methods for developing technical documentation, so this is not a requirement for GitHub users.

### Questions
If you have any questions about your repositories, please contact [Brandon Allen](mailto:brandon.allen@ualberta.ca) or [Marcus Becker](mailto:mabecker@ualberta.ca).

---

[^1]: Data files are generally added to `.gitignore` to prevent them from being pushed to GitHub.
